PETITIONER:
TUKA RAM AND ANR.
Vs.
RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA
DATE OF JUDGMENT15/09/1978
BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
BENCH:
KOSHAL, A.D.
SINGH, JASWANT
KAILASAM, P.S.
CITATION:
1979 AIR 185 1979 SCR (1) 810
1979 SCC (2) 143
ACT:
Indian Penal Code Sec. 375-Rape-What is the meaning of
without consent-Obtaining consent by putting fear of death
or hurt-Criminal trial-Onus is on prosecution to prove all
the ingredients of an offence.
HEADNOTE:
The prosecution alleged that appellant No. 1, the
Police Head Constable and appellant No. 2 Police Constable
attached to Desai Gunj Police Station raped Mathura (P.W. 1)
in the police station. Mathura’s parents died when she was a
child and she was living with her brother, Gama. Both of
them worked as labourers to earn a living. Mathura used to
go to the house of Nunshi for work and during the course of
her visits to that house she came in contact with Ashok who
was the sister’s son of Nunshi. The contact developed into
an intimacy so that Ashok and Mathura decided to become
husband and wife.
On 26th of March, 1972 Gama lodged a report at the
police station alleging that Mathura had been kidnapped by
Nunshi, her husband Laxman and Ashok. The report was
recorded by Head Constable Baburao, at whose instance all
the three persons complained against as well as Mathura were
brought to the police station at about 9 p.m. and the
statements of Ashok and Mathura were recorded. By that time,
it was 10.30 p.m. and Baburao asked all the persons to leave
with a direction to Gama to bring a copy of the entry
regarding the birth date of Mathura. After Baburao left
Mathura, Nunshi and Gama and Ashok started to leave the
police station. The appellants, however, asked Mathura to
wait at the police station and told her companions to move
out. The direction was complied with.
The case of the prosecution is that immediately
thereafter Ganpat, appellant No. 1, took Mathura into a
latrine raped her and thereafter dragged her to a Chhapri on
the back side and raped her again. Thereafter, appellant No.
2 fondled with her private parts but could not rape her
because he was in a highly intoxicated condition.
Nunshi, Gama and Ashok who were waiting outside the
police station for Mathura grew suspicious. They, therefore
shouted and attracted a crowd. Thereafter, a complaint was lodged. Mathura was examined by a doctor who found that she
had no injury on her person. Her hymen revealed old
ruptures. The vagina admitted two fingers easily. The age of
the girl was estimated by the doctor to be between 14 and 16
years. The Chemical Examiner did not find the traces of
semen in the pubic hair and vaginal-smear slides. The
presence of semen was, however, detected on the girl’s
clothes.
The Sessions Judge found that there was no satisfactory
evidence to prove that Mathura was below 16 years of age on
the date of occurrence. He held that Mathura was "a shocking
liar" whose testimony "is riddled with falsehood and
improbabilities". The Court came to the conclusion that she
had sexual
811
intercourse while at the police station but rape had not
been proved and that she was habituated to sexual inter-
course, but finding that Nunshi and Ashok would get angry
with her, she had to sound virtuous before them. Really
speaking, she would have surrendered her body to the
Constable.
6. The District Judge, therefore, acquitted the
appellants. The High Court reversed the order of acquittal.
The High Court found that the sexual intercourse was
forcible and amounted to rape. Since both the accused were
strangers to Mathura, it was highly improbable that Mathura
would make any overtures or invite the accused to satisfy
her sexual desire. It is possible that a girl who was
involved in a complaint filed by her brother would make such
overtures or advances. However the initiative must have come
from the accused and if such initiative came from the
accused, she could not have resisted the same. About
appellant Tuka Ram, the Court believed that he had not made
any attempt to rape the girl but took her word for granted
insofar as he was alleged to have fondled her private parts
after the act of sexual intercourse by Ganpat appellant.
7. In an appeal by special leave, the appellant
contended that :-
(1) there is no direct evidence about the nature
of the consent of the girl to the alleged act
of sexual intercourse. Therefore, it had to
be inferred from the available circumstances
and it could not be deduced from those
circumstances that the girl had been
subjected to or was under any fear or
compulsion as would justify an inference of
any "passive submission."
(2) The alleged intercourse was a peaceful affair
and the story of stiff resistance is all
false.
(3) The averments of the girl that she had
shouted loudly is false.
(4) The reasoning of the High Court that the girl
must have submitted to sexual intercourse
because of the fear does not amount to
consent.
Secondly, the High Court lost sight of the fact that
Mathura and Gama had started to leave the police station and
the case is that at that time Ganpat caught her.
Allowing the appeal, the Court
^
HELD : 1. The onus is always on the prosecution to
prove affirmatively each ingredient of the offence. It was
therefore, incumbent on the prosecution to prove all the
ingredients of Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code. The High Court has not given a finding that the consent of the
girl was obtained by putting her in a state of fear of death
or of hurt. Therefore, the third clause of section 375 will
not apply. There could be no fear because the girl was taken
away by Ganpat right from amongst her near and dear ones.
The circumstantial evidence available is not only capable of
being construed in a way different from that adopted by the
High Court but actually derogates in no uncertain measure
from the inference drawn by it. [817G-H, 818A, G-H,819A]
Secondly, the intercourse in question is not proved to
amount rape and that no offence is brought home to appellant
Ganpat. As far as Tuka Ram is concerned, the girl has made
serious allegations against Tuka Ram in the First
812
Information Report. She went back on these allegations at
the Trial. The presence of Tuka Ram at the police station is
not inculpatory and is capable of more explanations than
one. The appellants were acquitted. [819C-E]
JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No.
64 of 1977.
Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Order
dated 12th/13th December, 1978 of the Bombay High Court
(Nagpur Bench) in Criminal Appeal No. 193/74.
M. N. Phadke, S. V. Deshpande, V. M. Phadke and N. M.
Ghatate for the Appellants.
H. R. Khanna and M. N. Shroff for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KOSHAL, J.-This appeal by special leave is directed
against the judgment dated the 12th October 1976 of the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay (Nagpur Bench) reversing a
judgment of acquittal of the two appellants of an offence
under section 376 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code recorded by the Sessions Judge, Chandrapur, on the 1st
of June 1974, and convicting Tukaram, appellant No. 1, of an
offence under section 354 of the Code and the second
appellant named Ganpat of one under section 376 thereof. The
sentences imposed by the High Court on the two appellants
are rigorous imprisonment for a year and 5 years
respectively.
2. Briefly stated, the prosecution case is this.
Appellant No. 1, who is a Head Constable of police, was
attached to the Desai Gunj police station in March, 1972 and
so was appellant No. 2 who is a police constable.
Mathura (P.W. 1) is the girl who is said to have been
raped. Her parents died when she was a child and she is
living with her brother, Gama (P.W. 3). Both of them worked
as labourers to earn a living. Mathura (P. W. 1) used to go
to the house of Nunshi (P.W. 2) for work and during the
course of her visits to that house, came into contact with
Ashok, who was the sister’s son of Nunshi (P.W. 2) and was
residing with the latter. The contact developed into an
intimacy so that Ashok and Mathura (P.W. 1) decided to
become husband and wife.
On the 26th of March, 1972, Gama (P.W. 3) lodged report
Ex-P8 at police station Desai Gunj alleging that Mathura
(P.W. 1) had been kidnapped by Nunshi (P.W. 2), her husband
Laxman and the said Ashok. The report was recorded by Head
Constable Baburao (P.W. 8) at whose instance all the three
persons complained against as well as Mathura (P.W. 1) were
brought to the police station at 813 about 9 p.m. and who recorded the statements of the two
lovers. By then it was about 10-30 p.m. and Baburao (P.W. 8)
told them to go after giving them a direction that Gama
(P.W. 3) shall bring a copy of the entry regarding the birth
of Mathura (P.W.1) recorded in the relevant register and
himself left for his house as he had yet to take his evening
meal. At that time the two appellants were present at the
police station.
After Baburao (P.W. 8) had gone away, Mathura (P.W. 1),
Nunshi (P.W. 2), Gama (P.W. 3) and Ashok started leaving the
police station. The appellants, however, asked Mathura (P.W.
1) to wait at the police station and told her companions to
move out. The direction was complied with. Immediately
thereafter Ganpat appellant took Mathura (P.W.1) into a
latrine situated at the rear of the main building, loosened
her under-wear, lit a torch and stared at her private parts.
He then dragged her to a chhapri which serves the main
building as its back verandah. In the chhapri he felled her
on the ground and raped her in spite of protests and stiff
resistance on her part. He departed after satisfying his
lust and then Tukaram appellant, who was seated on a cot
nearby, came to the place where Mathura (P.W. 1) was and
fondled her private parts. He also wanted to rape her but
was unable to do so for the reason that he was in a highly
intoxicated condition.
Nunshi (P.W.2), Gama (P.W. 3) and Ashok, who had been
waiting outside the police station for Mathura (P.W.1) grew
suspicious when they found the lights of the police station
being turned off and its entrance door being closed from
within. They went to the rear of the police station in order
to find out what the matter was. No light was visible inside
and when Nunshi (P.W. 2) shouted for Mathura (P.W. 1) there
was no response. The noise attracted a crowd and some time
later Tukaram appellant emerged from the rear of the police
station and on an enquiry from Nunshi (P.W. 2) stated that
the girl had already left. He himself went out and shortly
afterwards Mathura (P.W. 1) also emerged from the rear of
the police station and informed Nunshi (P.W. 2) and Gama
(P.W. 3) that Ganpat had compelled her to undress herself
and had raped her.
Nunshi (P.W. 2) took Mathura (P.W. 1) to Dr. Khume
(P.W. 9) and the former told him that the girl was subjected
to rape by a police constable and a Head Constable in police
station Desai Gunj. The doctor told them to go to the police
station and lodge a report there.
814
A few persons brought Head Constable Baburao (P.W. 8)
from his house. He found that the crowd had grown restive
and was threatening to beat Ganpat appellant and also to
burn down the police station. Baburao (P.W. 8), however, was
successful in persuading the crowd to disperse and
thereafter took down the statement (Ex. 5) of Mathura (P.W.
1) which was registered as the first information report.
Mathura (P.W. 1) was examined by Dr. Kamal Shastrakar
at 8 p.m. on the 27th of March 1972. The girl had no injury
on her person. Her hymen revealed old ruptures. The vagina
admitted two fingers easily. There was no matting of the
pubic hair. The age of the girl was estimated by the doctor
to be between 14 and 16 years. A sample of the public hair
and two vaginal-smear slides were sent by the doctor in a
sealed packet to the Chemical Examiner who found no traces
of semen therein. Presence of semen was however detected on
the girl’s clothes and the pyjama which was taken off the
person of Ganpat appellant.
3. The learned Sessions Judge found that there was no satisfactory evidence to prove that Mathura was below 16
years of age on the date of the occurrence. He further held
that she was "a shocking liar" whose testimony "is riddled
with falsehood and improbabilities". But he observed that
"the farthest one can go into believing her and the
corroborative circumstances, would be the conclusion that
while at the Police Station she had sexual intercourse and
that, in all probability, this was with accused No. 2." He
added however that there was a world of difference between
"sexual intercourse" and "rape", and that rape had not been
proved in spite of the fact that the defence version which
was a bare denial of the allegations of rape, could not be
accepted at its face value. He further observed: "Finding
Nunshi angry and knowing that Nunshi would suspect some
thing fishy, she (Mathura) could not have very well admitted
that of her own free will, she had surrendered her body to a
Police Constable. The crowd included her lover Ashok, and
she had to sound virtuous before him. This is why-this is a
possibility-she might have invented the story of having been
confined at the Police Station and raped by accused No.
2................................... Mathura is habituated
to sexual intercourse, as is clear from the testimony of Dr.
Shastrakar, and accused No. 2 is no novice. He speaks of
nightly discharges. This may be untrue, but there is no
reason to exclude the possibility of his having stained his
Paijamal with semen while having sexual intercourse with
persons other than
815
Mathura. The seminal stains on Mathura can be similarly
accounted for. She was after all living with Ashok and very
much in love with him.................. " and then concluded
that the prosecution had failed to prove its case against
the appellants.
4. The High Court took note of the various findings
arrived at by the Learned Sessions Judge and then itself
proceeded to sift the evidence bearing in mind the principle
that a reversal of the acquittal would not be justified if
the view taken by the trial court was reasonably possible,
even though the High Court was inclined to take a different
view of the facts. It agreed with the learned Sessions Judge
in respect of his finding with regard to the age of Mathura
(P.W. 1) but then held that the deposition of the girl that
Ganpat appellant had had sexual intercourse with her was
reliable, supported as it was by circumstantial evidence,
especially that of the presence of stains of semen on the
clothes of the girl and Ganpat appellant. The fact that
semen was found neither on the public hair nor on the
vaginal-smears taken from her person, was considered to be
of no consequence by reason of the circumstance that the
girl was examined by the lady doctor about 20 hours after
the event, and of the probability that she had taken a bath
in the, meantime. The High Court proceeded to observe that
although the learned Sessions Judge was right in saying that
there was a world of difference between sexual intercourse
and rape, he erred in appreciating the difference between
consent and "passive submission". In coming to the
conclusion that the sexual intercourse in question was
forcible and amounted to rape, the High Court remarked:
"Besides the circumstances that emerge from the oral
evidence on the record, we have to see in what situation
Mathura was at the material time. Both the accused were
strangers to her. It is not the case of the defence that
Mathura knew both these accused or any of them since before
the time of occurrence. It is, therefore, indeed, highly
improbable that Mathura on her part would make any overtures or invite the accused to satisfy her sexual desire. Indeed
it is also not probable that a girl who was involved in a
complaint filed by her brother would make such overtures or
advances. The initiative must, therefore, have come from the
accused and if such an initiative comes from the accused,
indeed she could not have resisted the same on account of
the situation in which she had found herself especially on
account of a complaint filed by her brother against her
which was pending enquiry at the very police station. If
these circumstances are taken into consideration it would be
clear that the initiative for sexual intercourse must have
come from the
816
accused or any of them and she had to submit without any
resistance............... Mere passive or helpless surrender
of the body and its resignation to the other’s lust induced
by threats or fear cannot be equated with the desire or
will, nor can furnish an answer by the mere fact that the
sexual act was not in opposition to such desire or
volition.................. On the other hand, taking
advantage of the fact that Mathura was involved in a
complaint filed by her brother and that she was alone at the
police station at the dead hour of night, it is more
probable that the initiative for satisfying the sexual
desire must have proceeded from the accused, and that victim
Mathura must not have been a willing party to the act of the
sexual intercourse. Her subsequent conduct in making
statement immediately not only to her relatives but also to
the members of the crowd leave no manner of doubt that she
was subjected to forcible sexual intercourse."
In relation to Tukaram appellant, the High Court did
not believe that he had made any attempt to rape the girl
but took her word for granted insofar as he was alleged to
have fondled her private parts after the act of sexual
intercourse by Ganpat appellant.
It was in these premises that the High Court convicted
and sentenced the two appellants as aforesaid.
5. The main contention which has been raised before us
on behalf of the appellants is that no direct evidence being
available about the nature of the consent of the girl to the
alleged act of sexual intercourse, the same had to be
inferred from the available circumstances and that from
those circumstances it could not be deduced that the girl
had been subjected to or was under any fear or compulsion
such as would justify an inference of any "passive
submission", and this contention appears to us to be well-
based. As pointed out earlier, no marks of injury were found
on the person of the girl after the incident and their
absence goes a long way to indicate that the alleged
intercourse was a peaceful affair, and that the story of a
stiff resistance having been put up by the girl is all
false. It is further clear that the averments on the part of
the girl that she had been shouting loudly for help are also
a tissue of lies. On these two points the learned Sessions
Judge and the High Court also hold the same view. In coming
to the conclusion that the consent of the girl was a case of
"passive submission", the High Court mainly relied on the
circumstance that at the relevant time the girl was in the
police station where she would feel helpless in the presence
of the two appellants who were persons in authority and
whose advances she could hardly repel all by herself and
inferred that her submission to the
817
act of sexual intercourse must be regarded as the result of
fear and, therefore, as no consent in the eye of law. This reasoning suffers from two errors. In the first place, it
loses sight of the fact which was admitted by the girl in
cross-examination and which has been thus described in the
impugned judgement:
"She asserted that after Baburao had recorded her
statement before the occurrence, she and Gama had started to
leave the police station and were passing through the front
door. While she was so passing, Ganpat caught her. She
stated that she knew the name of accused No. 2 as Ganpat
from Head Constable Baburao while giving her report Exh. 5.
She stated that immediately after her hand was caught by
Ganpat she cried out. However, she was not allowed to raise
the cry when she was being taken to the latrine but was
prevented from doing so. Even so, she had cried out loudly.
She stated that she had raised alarm even when the underwear
was loosened at the latrine and also when Ganpat was looking
at her private parts with the aid of torch. She stated that
the underwear was not loosened by her."
Now the cries and the alarm are, of course, a
concoction on her part but then there is no reason to
disbelieve her assertion that after Baburao (P.W. 8) had
recorded her statement, she and Gama had. started leaving
the police station and were passing through the entrance
door when Ganpat appellant caught hold of her and took her
away to the latrine. And if that be so, it would be
preposterous to suggest that although she was in the company
of her brother (and also perhaps of Ashok and her aunt
Nunshi) and had practically left the police station, she
would be so over-awed by the fact of the appellants being
persons in authority or the circumstance that she was just
emerging from a police station that she would make no
attempt at all to resist. On the other hand, her natural
impulse would be to shake of the hand that caught her and
cry out for help even before she noticed who her molester
was. Her failure to appeal to her companions who were no
others than her brother, her aunt and her lover, and her
conduct in meekly following Ganpat appellant and allowing
him to have his way with her to the extent of satisfying his
lust in full, makes us feel that the consent in question was
not a consent which could be brushed aside as "passive
submission".
Secondly, it has to be borne in mind that the onus is
always on the prosecution to prove affirmatively each
ingredient of the offence it seeks to establish and that
such onus never shifts. It was, therefore, incumbent on it
to make out that all the ingredients of section
818
375 of the Indian Penal Code were present in the case of the
sexual intercourse attributed to Ganpat appellant. That
section lays down:
375. ‘A man is said to commit "rape" who except in the
case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a
woman under circumstances falling under any of the five
following descriptions:
First.-Against her will.
Secondly.-Without her consent.
Thirdly.-With her consent, when her consent has been
obtained by putting her in fear of death, or of hurt.
Fourthly.-With her consent, when the man knows that he
is not her husband, and that her consent is given
because she believes that he is another man to whom she
is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.-With or without her consent, when she is under
sixteen years of age.
Explanation.-Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse necessary to the
offence of rape.
Exception.-Sexual intercourse by a man with his
own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years of
age, is not rape.’
The section itself states in clauses Thirdly and
Fourthly as to when a consent would not be a consent within
the meaning of clause Secondly. For the proposition that the
requisite consent was lacking in the present case, reliance
on behalf of the State can be placed only on clause Thirdly
so that it would have to be shown that the girl had been put
in fear of death or hurt and that that was the reason for
her consent. To this aspect of the matter the High Court was
perhaps alive when it talked of "passive submission" but
then in holding that the circumstances available in the
present case make out a case of fear on the part of the
girl, it did not give a finding that such fear was shown to
be that of death or hurt, and in the absence of such a
finding, the alleged fear would not vitiate the consent.
Further, for circumstantial evidence to be used in order to
prove an ingredient of an offence, it has to be such that it
leads to no reasonable inference other than that of guilt,
We have already pointed out that the fear which clause
Thirdly of section 375 speaks of is negatived by the
circumstance that the girl is said to have been taken away
by Ganpat right from amongst her near and dear ones at a
point of time when they were, all leaving the police station
819
together and were crossing the entrance gate to emerge out
of it. The circumstantial evidence available, therefore, is
not only capable of being construed in a way different from
that adopted by the High Court but actually derogates in no
uncertain measure from the inference drawn by it.
6. In view of what we have said above, we conclude that
the sexual intercourse in question is not proved to amount
to rape and that no offence is brought home to Ganpat
appellant.
7. The only allegation found by the High Court to have
been brought home to Tukaram appellant is that he fondled
the private parts of the girl after Ganpat had left her. The
High Court itself has taken note of the fact that in the
first information report (Ex. 5) the girl had made against
Tukaram serious allegations on which she had gone back at
the trial and the acts covered by. Which she attributed in
her deposition to Ganpat instead. Those allegations were
that Tukaram who had caught hold of her in the first
instance, had taken her to the latrine in the rear of the
main building, had lit a torch and had stared at her private
parts in the torch-light. Now if the girl could alter her
position in regard to these serious allegations at will,
where is the assurance that her word is truthful in relation
to what she now says about Tukaram ? The High Court appears
to have been influenced by the fact that Tukaram was present
at the police station when the incident took place and that
he left it after the incident. This circumstance, in our
opinion, is not inculpatory and is cable of more
explanations than one. We do not, therefore, propose to take
the girl at her word in relation to Tukaram appellant and
hold that the charge remains wholly unproved against him.
8. In the result, the appeal succeeds and is accepted.
The judgment of the High Court is reversed and the
conviction recorded against as well as the sentences imposed
upon the appellants by it are set aside.
P.M.P. Appeal allowed.
